---
title: Development Philosophy
description: How I'm approaching development of Upstart
---

There is a simple philosophy behind Upstart. One that should hopefully inform
the continued development of the library.

## Match The Library

Wherever possible, do things that match the way React does, or would do them.

By way of example, consider custom events. The event itself should be prefixed
with `on` to match the React API, e.g. `onToggle`, whilst the event handler
passed to the event should be prefixed with `handle`, e.g. `handleToggle`.

## Composition over Inheritance

Upstart embraces the React philosophy of composition over inheritance, which
allows us to start with very small components that have a single concern, and
compose them together is such a way that we end up with a complex UI, made of
simple components.

## Booleans wherever possible.

Many time, props can be boiled down to a simple boolean statement of true or
false, on or off, yes or no. Wherever possible, I try to get every property to
this level of simplicity, as I feel it makes APIs much simpler.

An example may be a `Button` component that has a number of different styles
including:

- rectangular,
- rounded,
- filled,
- outlined,
- primary,
- secondary,
- and more.

An initial thought may be to add a prop of something like `variant` that takes
in all of those options as strings and renders the output based on them, however
it can really be broken down to three different booleans: `isRounded`,
`isOutlined`, and `isSecondary`, each of which can override a default variant,
making the API simpler, as well as the implementation.

When creating a boolean prop, it's good practice to name your prop so that it is
clear it is a boolean. This can be achieved by using the most appropriate of
`is`/`can`/`has` as a prefix, e.g. `isDisabled`, `canWrap`, `hasIcon`. This can
significantly decrease the effort involved with reading and understanding code
bases and component APIs.

## Everything has a default

I don't believe in required props. If a prop is required, there had better be a
very good reason for it. Instead, props should all be optional, with a default
value (or, even better, props should be simple booleans). This not only enables
users to use components much more easily, but it also simplifies implementation
by reducing the number of logic paths that need to be accounted for.

## Children all the way down

Unless there is a good reason for it, content should be provided to a component
in the form of child components. Once again, this makes the usage of components
simpler, while also freeing the developer to simplify the rendering logic in
their components.
